Revamping the build section (#30)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/build-build-with-polkadot.md

Polkadot](https://medium.com/polkadot-network/everything-you-need-to-know-to-prepare-for-polkadot-32d08b929735)._

Polkadot is a blockchain protocol with two goals: providing **shared security** among all connected parachains and
allowing all connected chains to **interoperate** by using [ICMP](learn-interchain). With the advent of
[PDKs](build-pdk) like Parity Substrate and Cumulus, the time it takes to develop and launch a new chain has dropped
significantly. Whereas before it would take years to launch a new chain, now it may only take weeks or even days. 

This guide will walk you through the steps you can take today to get started building your vision with Polkadot. It
will explain the difference between a parachain and a smart contract (and why one may be better suited for your
application over the other). It will lay out the resources that are available now and the ones that are coming soon so
that you can get started creating your application in anticipation of the Polkadot mainnet launch later this year.

## Where are we now?

- Initial release: **End of 2019**
- Current PoC release: **PoC-4**
- Current testnet: **Alexander**

> - Substrate: **1.0.0-rc**

Reviewer: There have been other tags since, both RC and seemingly a stable 1.0, though missing a release. Does this indicate what's running on Kusama/Alexander?

Reviewer 2: Kusama looks to be running on substrate 2.0 (master branch) but 1.0 is the latest official substrate release, and also what alexander is running on.

> - Substrate: **1.0.0-rc**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Substrate: **1.0.0**
```

- Cumulus: **Initial release: October 2019**
- ink!: **Pre-Alpha**

**What you need to know**: Polkadot is currently on the v0.6 release with a running testnet named Alexander and Kusama,
a value-bearing canary network. The Alexander testnet has been live for over 6 months through the entire PoC-3 and
PoC-4 release cycles. Polkadot is being built with [implementations in various programming
languages](learn-implementations) ranging from Rust to JavaScript. Currently the leading implementation is built in
Rust and using the Substrate framework for developing blockchains. Substrate is a library that allows developers to
more easily develop entire blockchains by building from a base layer including a networking protocol, consensus, and a
Wasm interpreter. An in-development extension to Substrate called Cumulus will allow any Substrate built chain to

> connect to Polkadot and become a parachain. Substrate has had a 1.0.0 release, which settled its API for the time

Reviewer: See comment above. Substrate has had a 1.0 release, so not RC?

Reviewer 2: Added a suggestion to remove `-rc`

being.

Substrate chains can include smart contract functionality by using the provided [contracts runtime module from the SRML](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/tree/master/srml/contracts).

> This module allows for smart contracts compile to Wasm code to be deployed to the chain and instantiated by users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This module allows for smart contracts compiled to Wasm code to be deployed to the chain and instantiated by users.
```

> To facilitate development of Wasm smart contracts, Parity is also developing ink!, a domain specific language built

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To facilitate development of Wasm smart contracts, Parity is also developing [ink!](https://github.com/paritytech/ink), a domain specific language built
```

in Rust that is intended for writing smart contracts. 

Polkadot is planned to go live with an initial release at the end of 2019, depending on security audits and launch
provisions outside of control of the team. Now that the tools have started to appear and stabilize, there has not been
a better time to get your feet wet and start preparing for launch. But wait! Before you jump head-first into the code,
you should think about the kind of decentralized application you want to make and understand the different paradigms
available to developers who want to build for Polkadot.

## What is the difference between building a parachain, a parathread, or a smart contract?

Polkadot provides a few ways for you to deploy your application: as a smart contract on an existing parachain, as your

> own parachain, or as a parathread. There are trade-offs when working with either any of these and reading this section will help you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
own parachain, or as a parathread. There are trade-offs when working with each of these and reading this section will help you
```

understand them.

Parachains are individual chains containing their own runtime logic that benefit from the shared security and the
interchain messaging provided by the Polkadot relay chain. Parachains permit a high degree of flexibility and
customization but will require more effort to create.

Parathreads are like parachains and enable the developer to have lower-level control of the logic of their application.
The main difference between the two is economic, since parathreads will be much less expensive to secure than a parachain.

> The lower costs of parathreads are due to the nature that parathreads will only produce a block when they need to, unlike

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The lower costs of parathreads are due to the fact that parathreads will only produce a block when they need to, unlike
```

Reviewer 2: Although we may want to specify that they only generate a block _recorded by the relay chain_ -  AFAIK there's nothing stopping from a parathread internally generating _n_ (where _n_ > 1) blocks and then only adding a digest when it connects to the relay chain, right?

Author: That's true, good point.

parachains which have secured a slot to produce a block at every block of the relay chain. When building a parathread,
you will use the same tools (like PDKs) and you get all of the benefits of building a parachain, without the drawback
of the cost. 

> On the Polkadot mainnet, there will be one or more parachains that act as smart contract platforms. Smart contracts are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On the Polkadot mainnet, there can be parachains that act as smart contract platforms. Smart contracts are
```

executable programs that exist on only a single chain and are limited in complexity. Because they exist on a single

> chain, they have smooth interoperability with other smart contracts. However, they will always be constrained and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
chain, they can have smooth interoperability with other smart contracts on the same chain. However, they will always be constrained and
```

limited by the inherent characteristics of their host chain.

If there is a need to have a large amount of control over the design and features of your application, a parachain is a
better choice. Keep in mind, smart contracts can be used as a testing ground before later being turned into
full-fledged parachains. Smart contract platforms will usually have more convenient tooling like IDEs to facilitate

> quick iterations. A smart contract MVP could be created to gauge user interest before putting in the fuller work to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
quick iterations. A smart contract MVP could be created to gauge user interest before putting in the work to
```

build out a parachain.

> Parachains will grant the creators more space to build the monetary system of the chain from the ground up. They will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Parachains grant the creators more space to build the monetary system and other aspects of the chain from the ground up. They will
```

allow for more succinct and efficient execution of complex logic than could ever be offered by a smart contract

> platform. Parachains also offer more in the form of governance and can perform complete upgrades in a less

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
platform. Parachains also offer more flexibility in the form of governance and can perform complete upgrades in a less
```

controversial way than the current process of hard-forks.

Some examples of features you can have on a parachain or parathread:

- Custom fee structure (for example, pay a flat fee for transactions or pay per byte).
- Custom monetary policy for the native token and local economy.
- Treasury to be funded through transitions in your state function.
- A governance mechanism that could manage a DAO that is responsible for allocating your on-chain treasury.

![build 1](assets/build-1.png)

Parachains open possibilities to construct complex runtime logic that would be too expensive to execute with smart

> contracts. Parachains in comparison lack a gas metering system entirely and could potentially be vulnerable to bugs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
contracts. However, unlike smart contracts, parachains lack a mandatory gas metering system entirely and could potentially be vulnerable to bugs
```

that cause infinite loops (something that is prevented by design in smart contracts).

> You may also decided to harness a combination of parachain, parathread, and smart contract. If you have certain logic that requires

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may also decide to harness a combination of parachain, parathread, and smart contract. If you have certain logic that requires
```

loops and it cannot be removed, use the native parachain runtime to handle all complex logic and the smart contract to
call iteration. If you require off-chain data from an oracle, you may want to use a parathread as an oracle feed that

> only triggers once every 24 hours (this mostly makes sense if the data is useful to other players in the Polkadot

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
only triggers once every 24 hours (this makes the most sense if the data is useful to other players in the Polkadot
```

ecosystem too).

> Most likely you’ve already realized that your application is better suited to be one or the other (or a hybrid of them all

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most likely you’ve already realized that your application is better suited to be one or the other (or a hybrid of them both
```

), but if you need a quick recap to digest the information, you can use this comparison chart as a cheat sheet:

![build 2](assets/build-2.png)

> **Note:** The image above does not include parathreads, but as we mentioned before all the benefits of parachains

> > applies just as well to parathreads. However, they are cheaper to deploy and maintain. So if they had a column

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> apply just as well to parathreads. However, they are cheaper to deploy and maintain. So if they had a column
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> apply just as well to parathreads. However, parathreads are cheaper to deploy and maintain. So if they had a column
```

> on the table above, it would look like the parachain column with "Ease of deployment" and "Maintenance overhead"
> changed to `+`.

> This guide now splits into two sections depending on whether you’ve decided on smart contract or parachain to build

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide now splits into two sections depending on whether you’ve decided on a smart contract or a parachain to build
```

your application. Feel free to read both sections, or just the one that is applicable to you.

- [I want to build a parachain or parathread!](#so-you-want-to-build-a-parachain-or-parathread)
- [I want to build a smart contract!](#so-you-want-to-build-a-smart-contract)

## So you want to build a parachain or parathread...

Now that you have determined that building a parachain or parathread is the right approach for your new project, the next
step is to decide which framework to use. Frameworks for building a parachain or parathread are known as parachain
development kits (PDKs). Currently, the only PDK available is Substrate and Cumulus from Parity Technologies.

In the future, there will be many different PDKs available in different programming languages, just like there are 
multiple [implementations](learn-implementations.md) of the Polkadot runtime environment.

> **Call to Action:** Do you want to build a Parachain Development Kit from scratch? The Web3 Foundation is giving

> > grants to teams who are doing this, learn more and apply on the [W3F grants page](https://grants.web3.foundation).

Reviewer 2: Should we mention Gossamer et al. here?

Author: Gossamer is not ready for developer use afaik. Will look into it and add more info if applicable.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I meant that we could mention some of the upcoming projects by name instead of just saying that Substrate is the only one.  But I don't think it's a big deal and should stop this PR, we can add them in later one they're publicly ready.

that provides the necessary building blocks for constructing a chain. It includes a library of modular plug-ins
from which you can compose your chain logic and allows you to write your own modules to use or publish to the community.

The best way to get started with Substrate is to explore the [Substrate Development Hub](https://substrate.dev), an online
resource built and maintained by Parity Technologies.

We recommend that you poke around in there to become familiar with the common patterns. Once you have a solid
understanding, you can challenge yourself by progressing through the Substratekitties workshop then advancing to the
TCR Dappchain tutorial or one of the others.

### How to set up your parachain

After creating your chain logic with Substrate, you will be able to compile it down to a Wasm executable. This Wasm
code blob will contain the entire state transition function of your chain, and is what you will need to deploy your
project to Polkadot as either a parachain or parathread.

Validators on Polkadot will use the submitted Wasm code to validate the state transitions of your chain or thread, 

> but in order to do this requires some additional infrastructure. It needs some way to stay up to date with the most

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but doing this requires some additional infrastructure. A validator needs some way to stay up to date with the most
```

recent state transitions, since Polkadot nodes will not be required to also be nodes of your chain.

> This is where the collator node comes in to play, it the maintainer of your parachain and performs the critical action

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where the collator node comes into play. A collator is a maintainer of your parachain and performs the critical action
```

of producing new block candidates for your chain and passing them to Polkadot validators for inclusion in the Relaychain.

> Substrate comes with its own networking layer built-in but unfortunately only supports solo chains. However, there is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Substrate comes with its own networking layer built-in but unfortunately only supports solo chains (that is, chains which do not connect to the relay chain). However, there is
```

- Polkadot block authorship compatibility.
- Integrating Cumulus with your Substrate chain will port it into a parachain capable of working on Polkadot with
  minimal modification, possibly as little work as importing a crate and adding a single line.

Rob Habermeier, a co-founder of Polkadot, recently gave a talk at EthCC that gave the latest on the development of
Cumulus, which you can watch below.

[![img](http://img.youtube.com/vi/thgtXq5YMOo/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=thgtXq5YMOo)

### How to deploy your parachain or parathread in Polkadot

#### Parachain

In order to include your parachain into the Polkadot network, you will need to acquire a parachain slot.

Parachain slots will be sold in open auctions, the mechanics of which can be found on the [parachain
auction](learn-auction) page of the wiki.

#### Parathread

Parathreads will not require a parachain slot, so you will not need to engage in the candle auction mechanism. Instead,
you will be able to register your parathread code to the Relaychain for a fee and from then be able to start participating
in the per-block auctions for inclusion of your state transition into the Relaychain.

> For more information on how parathread per-block auctions work, see the more detailed [parathread](learn-parathread) page.

Reviewer 3: miss "s": learn-parathreads

> For more information on how parathread per-block auctions work, see the more detailed [parathread](learn-parathread) page.

Author: ```suggestion
For more information on how parathread per-block auctions work, see the more detailed [parathread](learn-parathreads) page.
```

## So you want to build a smart contract...

The Polkadot relay chain itself will not support smart contracts but since Polkadot is a network of many heterogeneous
blockchains, there will be parachains that do.

Already Parity Technologies has laid much of the groundwork for an out-of-the-box solution for parachains that want to
include smart contract functionality. The Substrate

> [contract](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/tree/master/srml/contract) module in the core SRML will support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[contract](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/tree/master/srml/contracts) module in the core SRML will support
```

smart contracts that are compiled to Wasm.

In order to develop a smart contract that compiles to Wasm, an appropriate language is also needed. For this, Parity
has been working on a domain specific language called [Ink](#ink).

One project that has announced intent to become a Polkadot parachain with support for smart contracts is
[Edgeware](#edgeware). As the ecosystem matures, there is a high probability that more chains will come forward as
smart contract enabled parachains.

Polkadot will also be compatible with preexisting smart contract platforms such as Ethereum and Tezos through bridges.

> This means that even work spent developing on these platforms today may be applicable to running on Polkadot in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that work spent developing on these platforms today may be applicable to running on Polkadot in the
```

future.

### Edgeware

Edgeware is a planned parachain for Polkadot which will allow for smart contracts. Along with other interesting
innovations in governance and token distribution, it will likely be the first parachain that will connect to the
Polkadot mainnet with smart contracts enabled. You can stay up to date with the project on their
[website](https://edgewa.re).

### Ink

[Ink](https://github.com/paritytech/ink) is a domain specific language for writing smart contracts in Rust that will
compile down to Wasm code. As stated in the README, it is still in an experimental phase so brave developers should be
aware that they might have a less-than-smooth development experience, but with enough determination can use it to build
their application.

> For the interested developers, they can get started writing smart contracts using Ink by studying the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For interested developers, they can get started writing smart contracts using Ink by studying the
```

[examples](https://github.com/paritytech/ink/tree/master/examples) which have already been written. These can be used
as guideposts to writing more complex logic which will be deployable on smart contract parachains.

Ink! has laid much of the groundwork for a new smart contract stack that is based on a Wasm virtual machine and
compatible with Substrate chains.

Substrate includes a contract module that includes the core logic needed for a smart contract chain. Along these lines,
ink! will be a smart contract language written in Rust that takes advantage of the already existing Rust tooling and

> support compilation to Wasm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
supports compilation to Wasm.
```

## Deploying your smart contract

A smart contract is simply some code that exists at an address on a chain and is callable by external actors. The key
part is that you actually have to put the code on chain before anyone can start executing it!

Deploying your smart contract on chain will vary slightly for whichever specific parachain you will use, but generally

> you will send a special transaction that will CREATE the smart contract on the ledger. You will likely need to pay an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you will send a special transaction that will create the smart contract on the ledger. You will likely need to pay an
```

- A transaction fee associated with deploying each transaction.
- A subscription model in which you pay some chain entity routinely for usage of the platform.
- An access token model for which you need to hold a threshold of native tokens to use the platform (EOS has something
  similar). Storage rent.
- Free trial or developer promotion.
- Most smart contract platforms use some form of gas to limit the number of operations a user can perform. Users will
  be required to pay for the gas upfront and will be refunded for what they don’t use.

You will need to consider the storage and complexity of your smart contract to ensure that gas usage stays within
reasonable bounds. Storage will likely be expensive for whichever smart contract platform you use, so it is necessary

> to keep as much data off-chain as possible. You may consider using IPFS or Storj to keep the data and submitting only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to keep as much data off-chain as possible. You may consider using [IPFS](https://ipfs.io/) or [Storj](https://storj.io/) to keep the data and submitting only
```

the content address on chain.

### It's still early

It’s still very early for smart contracts on Polkadot and the development is only now stabilizing. We are actively
producing content to help developers get up to speed and will maintain the wiki with the latest resources. You should
also keep up to date with the following links:

- [Edgeware](https://edgewa.re).
- [ink!](https://github.com/paritytech/ink). (Keep an eye out for content on the wiki tab.)

> - [Substrate contracts module](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Substrate contracts module](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/tree/master/srml/contracts).
```
